---
layout: post
title: x = x + 1?
comments: True
---

OK, so it might seem like this is my "I hate C syntax" week, but really, this article applies to every C-style language. And python. And Pascal. Basically any language where mutable variables are first-class.

## `x = x + 1`

The first time I saw `x = x + 1` in a program, I was a little befuddled. To me, this had always been the unsolvable equation, the end of a proof by contradiction.

So I always used `x++`, which said to me: `increment x`.

But really, `x = x + 1` isn't the only problem. In mathematics, `=` is [symmetric](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Symmetric_relation), but a C-style `=` isn't.

For example,

```
x = y
```

sets `x` to `y`, while

```
y = x
```

sets `y` to `x`.

In this sense, Pascal probably got it right with `:=`, which clearly demonstrates the lack of symmetry this operator involves.

But there's really a bigger issue at stake here.

## LValues and RValues

An Lvalue is a value that can be assigned to. An Rvalue cannot.

```
int x;
int y[200];
int *z;
```

LValues include

```
x
y[2]
z
*z
z[200]
```

While non-Lvalue Rvalues (all Lvalues are RValues) include

```
&x
x + 2
&y[2]
```

This distinction seems to be a bit of a kludge. The fact that you can take the address of a box might seem to undermine the idea of evrything in the lanugage having a value. Identity becomes implicit (lvalue) rather than explicit (pointer).

## The solution

My solution is to get rid of `=`. Instead, we can use the much better `<-`, which has an address on the left and a value on the right. The program in [DFI](/2016/04/21/C-Style-Pointer-Syntax-Considered-Harmful/)-style C:

```
&int fib(x # int) {
    vals # &int;
    vals = malloc (x * sizeof *vals);
    counter # int;
    vals[0] = 0;
    vals[1] = 1;
    for (counter = 2; counter < x; counter = counter + 1) {
        vals[counter] = vals[counter-1] + vals[counter-2];
    }
    return vals;
}
```

can be translated to the folowing program:

```
&int fib(x # int) {
    vals # &int;
    &vals <- malloc (x * sizeof *vals);
    counter # int;
    vals + 0 <- 0;
    vals + 1 <- 1;
    for (&counter <- 2; counter < x; &counter <- counter + 1) {
        vals + counter <- vals[counter-1] + vals[counter-2];
    }
    return vals;
}
```

Going off [my last post](/2016/04/21/C-Style-Pointer-Syntax-Considered-Harmful/), I am going to suggest one final modification to types. `x # Y` should declare a value `x` in which a 

